# AFPS_PD1_PDL1

# **Application of molecular similarity and artificial neural networks for PD-L1 inhibitors virtual screening**

## **Abstract**
- Purpose: The goal of this study was to develop a model using artificial neural networks (ANN) and molecular similarity to predict the bioactivity of PD-L1 inhibitors, which help the immune system target cancer cells by reactivating tumor cell death through T-cell mediation.
- Methods Database of 2044 substances with PD-L1 inhibitory activity collected from Google Patents used in molecular similarity and the ANN model. Subsequently, a dataset of 2016 natural compounds was screened through molecular similarity and the ANN model, respectively. In terms of molecular similarity, BMS-1166 was chosen as the standard compound due to its PD-L1 inhibitory activity. Compounds with a Tanimoto coefficient >= 0.255 compared to BMS-1166 were considered potential candidates for further evaluation. Molecular similarity was constructed using three fingerprints (MACCS, ECFP2, RDKF), and decoys were generated by Deepcoy. The ANN model was built by SECFP fingerprints and then tuned with Bayesian Optimization to optimize its hyperparameters.
- Results The molecular similarity based on BMS-1166 and ECFP2 fingerprint with a similarity threshold of 0.255 resulted in a EF1% (Enrichment Factor 1%) equal to an optimal score of 11%. The ANN model was evaluated through internal and external validation procedures to assess its generalization. The model achieved promising results, with an average precision of 0.879±0.041 and an F1 score of 0.804±0.049 in cross-validation. In external validation, the model showed an average precision of 0.938 and an F1 score of 0.863. After screening a dataset of natural compounds using these models, only 4 potential substances were identified. 
- Conclusions Virtual screening identified 4 substances with potential PD-L1 inhibitory activity. We recommend synthesizing and testing the bioactivity of them, designing more molecular frameworks, and optimizing in silico process.

**KEYWORDS**: artificial neural network, molecular similarity, PD-L1, deep learning, drug classification.

# Contributors
- [Van-Thinh To](https://thinhump.github.io/)
- [Phuoc-Chung Nguyen Van](https://www.facebook.com/chung.nguyenvanphuoc.9)
- [Thanh-An Pham](https://thanh-an-pham.github.io/)
- [Tieu-Long Phan](https://tieulongphan.github.io/)
- [Ngoc-Tuyen Truong](https://scholar.google.com/citations?hl=vi&user=qx3eMsIAAAAJ) - [Corresponding author](mailto:truongtuyen@ump.edu.vn)
